grml-autoconfig(8)
==================

Name
----
grml-autoconfig - script and configuration framework for the grml system

Synopsis
--------
grml-autoconfig

Options
-------

The program grml-autoconfig does not support any options but needs to be run
with root permissions as it modifies a system wide configuration file
(/etc/grml/autoconfig).

About
-----

The program grml-autoconfig does not support any options but needs to be run
with root permissions as it modifies a system wide configuration file
(/etc/grml/autoconfig).  'grml-autoconfig' is an interface to the framework
named grml-autoconfig.  /etc/init.d/grml-autoconfig is the main script of the
grml-system where all the hardware recognition and activation of services take
place.

grml-autoconfig supports an adjustable configuration via the configuration file
named /etc/grml/autoconfig. The script named Bgrml-autoconfig is a simple
dialog-based interface to the configuration file. You can either use the script
for configuring grml-autoconfig or modify the configuration file manually on
your own (there is no interference).

The grml-autoconfig package creates three initscripts on installation:
/etc/init.d/bootlocal.first, /etc/init.d/bootlocal.middle and
/etc/init.d/bootlocal.last.

They are created in the maintainer scripts of the grml-autoconfig package.  This
means they are not part of the package itself and therefore also not marked as
configuration files of the package. As a result the files won't be touched
anymore, neither when upgrading nor when removing the package! If you want to
add your own bootup commands you can use these files.
/etc/init.d/bootlocal.first is executed at the very beginning, in runlevel 'S'.
/etc/init.d/bootlocal.middle is executed right before startup of grml-autoconfig
itself in runlevel '2' only (where grml-autoconfig is located as well).  Finally
/etc/init.d/bootlocal.last is executed as one of the last initscripts in
runlevel '2' only.

Files
-----

  */etc/init.d/grml-autoconfig*::

Init-script which runs the commands defined in /etc/grml/autoconfig.functions
after checking configuration file /etc/grml/autoconfig.

  */usr/sbin/grml-autoconfig*::

Dialog interface to the configuration file /etc/grml/autoconfig.

  */etc/grml/autoconfig*::

Default configuration file for grml-autoconfig framework.  You can override
settings via /etc/grml/autoconfig.local or use the dialog interface
/usr/sbin/grml-autoconfig.

  */etc/grml/autoconfig.local*::
User specific configuration file for grml-autoconfig. You can edit it directly
or use the dialog interface /usr/sbin/grml-autoconfig.


  */etc/grml/autoconfig.functions*::

Main functions of the grml-autoconfig. You do not need to configure or execute
the file.  For debugging purposes you can source this script also from within an
interactive shell and run specific functions afterwards.

  */etc/grml/lsb-functions*::

Based on /lib/lsb/init-functions this file provides an adjusted version of an
lsb-like booting sequence.

Bugs
----
If you find a bug please report it. See link:http://grml.org/bugs/[] for details
about how to report bugs.

See also
--------
grml-autoconfig(1), restore-config(1), save-config(1)

Author
------
grml-autoconfig was written by Michael Prokop <mika@grml.org>.
