mkpersistenthome(1)
===================

Name
----
mkpersistenthome - create persistent home directory

Synopsis
--------

mkpersistenthome

About
-----

You have a local partition you would like to use as your home-directory?  Just
use the interactive script called 'mkpersistenthome'. It will either create a
file named grml.img on the specified partition or create a partition using the
ext2 filesystem (you can specify the option in a dialog inside the program).
grml.img is a loopback device which size you can specify manually.  It is
possible to scan through the partitions to identify the appropriate partition.
To use a home-directory located on your hard-drive use the appropriate boot
parameter on bootprompt:

  home=/dev/sda3    =>   use /dev/sda3 as the homepartition
  home=scan         =>   scan through the available partitions and search for file grml.img

Use persistent home directory
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You want to use a persistent home directory which includes all the files located
in $HOME. Use the script mkpersistenthome to create such a persistent home
directory. You have the options to either use a specific partition as your home
directory or add a loopback file named grml.img on the specified partition (the
default).

TIP: /dev/external in the partition selection of mkpersistenthome is an usb
device without partitions. /dev/external1 corresponds to the first partition on
an usb device (usually an usb stick).

After running the script mkpersistenthome you can use the boot parameter home to
activate the home directory. If you are using the option with the loopback file
(grml.img) you can boot via:

  grml home=scan

which will scan through the partitions and if a file grml.img is found it will
be mounted as your $HOME-directory. If you want to use a partition as your home
directory specify the device as an option. If you want to use /dev/sda2 as your
$HOME boot via:

  grml home=/dev/sda2

Notice: the files located in /etc/skel will be copied to the partition (but will
not overwrite any files).

Bugs
----
If you find a bug please report it. See link:http://grml.org/bugs/ for details
about how to report bugs.

See also
--------
grml-autoconfig(1), grml-autoconfig(8), restore-config(1), save-config(1)

Author
------
(c) 2005++, Michael Prokop <mika@grml.org>
